>> So I'm Dan Laks.
I have a Masters of Science
in environmental health
science from UC Berkeley.
I decided to look
at what would be
the effects of chronic
mercury exposure
on the human population.
What this study found was
that chronic mercury exposure
was rising over the
years, 1999 to 2006,
within the US population.
And this rise went from 3% of
the US population to almost 30%
of the US population
having detectable amounts
of inorganic mercury
in their blood.
Now inorganic mercury
is a specific form
of mercury either made
from organic mercury, which
gets de-methylated
to it, or it's also
made from elemental
mercury such as you
get from dental amalgams,
which gets catalyzed to it.
And these deposits
of inorganic mercury
actually get deposited in
different tissues of the body
and stay there for years.
So not only was
there an increase
in this chronic
mercury exposure,
but this chronic
mercury exposure
was at a level that was
sufficient to elicit
a biological response in the
deliver, the immune system,
and the pituitary.
So I looked at
those three areas,
and I looked at biomarkers
that indicated function
for those three areas.
And all three areas
were associated
with this chronic
mercury exposure.
So the immune system--
the biomarker I chose of white
blood cell count and that
was inversely related to
chronic mercury exposure.
So if you have chronic
mercury exposure,
you're going to have
immune function problems,
and this has already
been shown in vitro
and in other
toxicological studies.
And in addition, the same
was true with bilirubin
and albumin, which both
biomarkers of the liver
function and associated
with lots of diseases
and most strikingly and most
novel finding of this study
was the association with
luteinizing hormone, which
is secreted by the pituitary.
And now why this is important
is because luteinizing hormone--
and this was my
second paper that I
published on the subject--
was that luteinizing hormone
provides a causal mechanism
for mercury associated disease.
Luteinizing hormone
is in a place
where mercury is deposited in
the body at a much higher rate
than other regions of the
brain at 200% to 300% higher.
It basically
provides a mechanism
for all of the
associated symptoms
and morbidity associated
with mercury exposure
and associated diseases.
Our chronic mercury
exposures have
reached a level that is having
a significant biological effect.
And not only that
but it is having
a increased and elevated
risk for our population
and for individuals over time.
It seems obvious to
researchers in the field
that it's a growing health risk
that needs to be addressed.
Not only that, it's a political
issue that is being stymied.
So without a change in
the political environment,
science and human health
is really at risk.